1. Eight Billion Minds
On approximately 15 November 2022, the eight billionth person on Earth
was born. Nobody knows exactly who this person was, or precisely when
they arrived, but media-savvy politicians in far-flung places quickly jumped
to claim the honour for one of their citizens. In the Philippine capital city of
Manila, a baby girl called Vinice Mabansag, born at 1.29 a.m., was greeted
by phalanxes of journalists and TV crews eager to beam news of the
symbolic eight billionth human around the planet. This ten-digit global
population milestone – an eight and nine zeros – had arrived just eleven
years after the last.
A global population of eight billion is a lot of people. If you wanted to
speed-date the entire world non-stop in a single marathon session, chatting
to each partner for just a single minute, it would take you more than 15,000
years to reach the end of your roster. Eight billion people means eight
billion minds, and those eight billion minds house an awful lot of
knowledge. The collective sum of human knowledge is too astronomical to
contemplate. Even the entirety of what is known by a single individual is
impossible to grasp. First, there are facts learned in school. If, like me, you
were educated in the UK, you would probably have learned about adverbs,
interlocking spurs, photosynthesis and the six wives of Henry VIII. But this
comprises only the tiniest sliver of everything you know. Much of your
knowledge is intuited from simply observing the world, and figuring out
how things work – an epistemic achievement that we call ‘common sense’.
You know that dogs cannot sing, that there are no sunflowers on the moon,
and that Napoleon Bonaparte never owned an iPhone. You know that
strawberry jam is sticky, that most people don’t knit socks in the shower,
and that bounding from Beijing to Berlin on a pogo stick will give you sore
knees. You know things about other people, and about their beliefs and
desires. You know that in the Agatha Christie classic, Poirot doesn’t know
who committed murder on the Orient Express, but the murderer knows and
doesn’t want Poirot to find out. Then there are those private things that only
you know, like that your bedroom curtains smell distinctly musty, your
favourite animal is the Tasmanian devil, or that your left foot is itching right
now.
As our civilization has flourished, we have found ever more inventive
ways to organize, to document, and to exchange this information with each
other. We fill libraries with academic theories concerning our society, the
natural world, and the meaning of existence. We read the newspapers to
learn about wars and elections in faraway places. We send our children to
school, so that ideas can cascade down the generations. We write poignant
stories, compose rousing symphonies, and paint brooding canvasses that
offer windows into the private corners of our innermost minds. We trumpet
our triumphs and indignations to tens or hundreds or millions of people in
the tumult of social media. These global edifices for mass information
exchange – education, media and the arts – are the bedrock of our
civilization. Over the centuries, they have transformed humans from hairy
grub-foragers into the uncontested architects of the Anthropocene age.
The collective weight of human scholarship – billions of words penned in
books and journals every year – has also allowed us to notch up some pretty
impressive scientific and technological achievements. Physicists now have
a fairly decent sense of how the universe began, even though it happened
some 13.8 billion years before any of us was born, and anthropologists have
traced the pathways of human evolution and global dispersion over the past
two million years, from the Rift Valley (the cradle of humanity) to Silicon
Valley (the cradle of digital technology). We have sent spacecraft to explore
beyond the reaches of our own solar system, built terrifying weapons that
could annihilate our entire civilization in less time than it takes to brush
your teeth, and engineered clones of our fellow species, among them sheep,
monkeys and cats (including one delightfully called Copy Cat). We have
collectively founded a global economy so massively interconnected that the
humblest consumer item is made of parts from all corners of the planet,
delivered on cargo ships that each weighs more than all the hippos in the
world combined. Most recently, facing the menace of a global pandemic,
biologists sat down and designed a vaccine that used a tiny piece of genetic
material to instruct the body how to combat the SARS-CoV-2 virus, and
governments implemented public policy initiatives to mass-inoculate their
citizens, saving tens of millions of human lives. All this is possible because
of the knowledge we share with each other.
But there is so much to know, and so little time to know it. Imagine if
you were asked to write down everything you think is true in the world.
Even if you are just setting out on life’s journey, this task would probably
consume all the precious minutes that you have left. Now imagine, if you
can, the Herculean task of documenting the vast universe of all human
knowledge. It is unthinkable – no person could possibly grasp everything
there is to know. But what if – and here is the dream that has tantalized
philosophers, scientists, and assorted utopians since the Enlightenment first
dawned – what if we could automate that process, and build an artificial
mind that imbibed all knowledge, one that could tell us exactly what was
right, what was true, how the world worked, and what the future might
hold?
This book is the story of that dream. It begins in the Age of Reason, in
the late seventeenth century, when people first realized that natural
phenomena (like gravity and rainbows) were caused by a set of
discoverable physical laws, and not the mood swings of a capricious god.
Seeing the world anew through this materialist lens, philosophers began to
consider that thinking itself might be a physical process, and tried to
transcribe the language in which it occurred. By the mid-nineteenth century,
machines began to proliferate as the industrial revolution kicked into gear,
raising the question of whether a reasoning machine could be built from
nuts and bolts, like the steam engine, the typewriter or the Jacquard loom (a
mechanical device for automating textile production that worked using
punch cards, like early computers). In the twentieth century, electronic
technologies blossomed, and the first computer scientists dared to imagine
machines with brains more powerful than our own. If we could make sense
of our human mental machinery, then could we not build an artificial mind
so smart it would make Aristotle look like Homer Simpson? By the 1950s, a
new academic discipline had been founded with the goal of turning these
dreams into reality, and the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) research was
born.
In tandem, the vision of an artificial mind has inspired hundreds of
novels, plays and films in which sentient machines take their place in
human society as overlords, slaves, monsters or uncanny neighbours. These
works of fiction invite us to consider a world populated by strange new
minds – mechanical intelligences that might be quite unlike us. What would
it be like to meet and converse with a machine? What would an artificial
agent make of our teeming society? What could we learn from a synthetic
intelligence? How would it come to terms with its own robotic existence?
Would a mechanical brain feel joy and loneliness just like we do? And
should we be scared – would an intelligent machine want to break free, and
make its own choices? Or would it even try tyrannically to subjugate its
human inventors?
Today, AI is everywhere, and advanced thinking machines are poised to
dramatically shape our technological future. These questions are no longer
literary curiosities. In the past few years, we have witnessed the arrival of
AI systems, known as large language models or LLMs, which act as vast
repositories of human knowledge and can share ideas with people in words
that we all understand. These models do not know everything, but they
definitely know more than any one person. And despite claims to the
contrary, they also have healthy doses of common sense. I asked a leading
LLM – GPT-4 – whether sunflowers grow on the moon. It replied fluently
and sensibly: ‘There are no sunflowers or any other forms of life, plant or
otherwise, on the moon. The moon lacks the atmosphere, water, and stable
temperature required to support Earth-like life forms.’ This is a watershed
moment for humanity, in which the dream of automating knowledge seems
to finally be within grasp.
The advent of these models has stirred vigorous debate concerning how
AI will shape our society in the near future. For many people, interacting
with AI systems that are embedded silently in software applications, or
chatting back in customer server apps, has become a daily reality. What
comes next, especially as AI systems become ever smarter? This is a very
modern question, but to hunt down the answers we first need to turn the
clock back hundreds of years, to consider the nature and origins of
knowledge itself. Where does our so-called wisdom come from, and how
has it allowed humans to dominate the planet? What is it that makes Homo
sapiens sapient? Why is it that we – and so far no other species – have
travelled to space and invented the Eurovision Song Contest?
The other species who live alongside us, from our nearest primate
cousins to our most distant relatives (mostly slimy things that live on the
ocean floor), are also capable of some impressive behaviours. Crows can
fashion sticks into hooks to retrieve grubs from ingenious puzzle apparatus,
bonobos take sexual experimentation to levels of exoticism that would
make an adult film star blush, and octopi are notorious for hatching
Houdini-style escapes from their laboratory aquaria. But it’s probably fair to
say that their achievements are not quite in the same ballpark as those of us
humans. Other animals haven’t discovered prime numbers, or worked out
how to play the saxophone. When the world mosquito population reached
eight billion, they didn’t hold a press conference featuring a symbolic baby
gnat. This implies that there is some special property of the human mind
that allows us to obtain and generate knowledge.
As we shall see, the hunt for this magic ingredient – that which allows us
to play Go, scale Mount Everest, and write epic poetry – has for hundreds
of years been inextricably intertwined with the question of how we might
build an artificial mind.